ARISTOTLE — NICOMACHEAN ETHICS: SELECTED PASSAGES
Translated by W. D. Ross (revised J. L. Ackrill and J. O. Urmson).
Source: Project Gutenberg eBook #8438 — public domain.
URL: https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438

----------------------------------------------------------------------

§ BOOK I — THE GOOD AT WHICH WE AIM

"Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and
pursuit, is thought to aim at some good; and for this reason the
good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things aim."

"If, then, there is some end of the things we do, which we desire
for its own sake (everything else being desired for the sake of
this), and if we do not choose everything for the sake of
something else (for at that rate the process would go on to
infinity, so that our desire would be empty and vain), clearly
this must be the good and the chief good."

§ BOOK I — THE FUNCTION ARGUMENT

"Human good turns out to be activity of soul in accordance with
virtue, and if there are more than one virtue, in accordance with
the best and most complete. But we must add 'in a complete life.'
For one swallow does not make a summer, nor does one day; and so
too one day, or a short time, does not make a man blessed and
happy."

§ BOOK II — VIRTUE AS HABIT

"Moral virtue comes about as a result of habit, whence also its
name is one that is formed by a slight variation from the word
'habit' (ethos). From this it is also plain that none of the moral
virtues arises in us by nature; for nothing that exists by nature
can form a habit contrary to its nature."

"We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act,
but a habit."
[Widely attributed paraphrase of II.4; the Ross rendering reads:
"These virtues are formed in man by his doing the actions."]

§ BOOK II — THE MEAN

"Virtue, then, is a state of character concerned with choice,
lying in a mean, i.e. the mean relative to us, this being
determined by a rational principle, and by that principle by which
the man of practical wisdom would determine it."

§ BOOK X — CONTEMPLATION

"If happiness is activity in accordance with virtue, it is
reasonable that it should be in accordance with the highest virtue;
and this will be that of the best thing in us. Whether it be
reason or something else that is this element which is thought to
be our natural ruler and guide and to take thought of things noble
and divine, whether it be itself also divine or only the most
divine element in us, the activity of this in accordance with its
proper virtue will be perfect happiness."

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Curated reading-room excerpt for the Agora Alpha demo. For the full
treatise (ten books), see Project Gutenberg #8438 or the Perseus
Greek text.
